HARI SREENIVASAN: Good evening.
I'm Hari Sreenivasan.
Gwen Ifill is in Elkhart,
Indiana.
On the "NewsHour" tonight: She
sits down with
President Obama to talk about
the economic
recovery and politics, among
other things,
followed by a town hall meeting.
We will have
a preview of the exclusive
interview.
And getting humans to Mars. A
new inflatable
space pod could be a big step in
any mission
to the Red Planet.
And also ahead, could you afford
$400 in an
emergency? Judy Woodruff talks
with writer
Neal Gabler about Americans'
financial fragility.
Plus, when a major earthquake in
Nepal took
8,000 lives, it also destroyed
some of the
country's history -- a look at
the clashes
over saving Nepal's monuments
and temples.
HARI SREENIVASAN: All that and
more on tonight's
"PBS NewsHour."
(BREAK)
HARI SREENIVASAN: President
Obama launched
an election-year effort today to
undercut
Republican claims that the
country is in decline.
He said it's not borne out by
the facts, but
he acknowledged Americans are
feeling stressed.
He spoke in an exclusive
interview with Gwen
Ifill, at a "PBS NewsHour" town
hall in Elkhart,
Indiana.
BARACK OBAMA, President of the
United States:
When we have gone through a
tough time -- and
we went through worst financial
crisis in
our lifetimes.
I'm looking around. And I think
it's safe
to say that it's been the worst
in the lifetimes
or memories of most people here.
Then you
feel nervous. A lot of times,
it's easy for
somebody to come up and say, you
know what,
if we deport all the immigrants
and build
a wall, or if we cut off trade
with China,
or if we do X or Y or Z, that
there's some
simple answer and, suddenly,
everything's
going to feel secure.
HARI SREENIVASAN: The town hall
will air this
evening as a "PBS NewsHour"
special. And we
will have an extended excerpt of
Gwen's interview
with the president after the
news summary.
In the day's other news: The
presidential
race was dominated by questions
about Trump
University, Donald Trump's
defunct real estate
seminar business. Two lawsuits
charge it defrauded
customers, and newly released
court documents
include instructions to Trump
employees to
use high-pressure tactics.
In Newark, New Jersey, today,
Democrat Hillary
Clinton charged it's more
evidence that the
Republican nominee-to-be is a
fraud.
HILLARY RODHAM CLINTON (D),
Presidential Candidate:
He is trying to scam America,
the way he scammed
all those people at Trump U.
It's important
that we recognize what he has
done, because
that's usually a pretty good
indicator of
what he will do.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Trump didn't
immediately
respond, but he has said that
most people
who took the seminars were
satisfied. He's
also accused the San Diego judge
who released
the documents of being hostile
to him. That
judge now says some of the
material was released
by mistake, and must be resealed
until sections
can be blacked out.
Flooding fueled by heavy rain
swept across
more of the Texas countryside
today. Several
rivers surged over their banks,
and evacuation
orders went out to a series of
towns. Houston's
southwestern suburbs braced for
the worst
as the Brazos River hit record
highs and kept
going.
KAREN MYERS, Texas: Very scary
watching the
water just rise so fast. I mean,
it came up
so fast. I couldn't believe it.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Entire
communities and their
roadways are now submerged by
the flooded
river, and many homes have been
turned into
islands. Hundreds of people who
live in them
have been forced to flee, but
others are cut
off.
Officials have carried out more
than 120 boat
rescues across Fort Bend County,
including
this one in Rosenberg. Police in
the nearby
city of Richmond warned there's
more to come.
LT. LOWELL NEINAST, Richmond
Police Department:
This river is going to stay high
throughout
the rest of the week and into
the weekend.
So we're going to have some --
this is going
to be awhile.
HARI SREENIVASAN: At the same
time, major
flooding has paralyzed parts of
North Texas.
The Trinity River is on the rise
IN Dallas.
Floodwaters have also engulfed
Granbury, outside
Fort Worth. Now, with up to 10
more inches
of rain in the forecast, much of
Texas is
under a flash flood watch.
From flood to fire: The people
of Fort McMurray,
Canada, began returning home
today, for the
first time since a wildfire
roared through
one month ago. A trickle of
traffic brought
evacuees back into the town in
Alberta today.
They were told to bring up to
two weeks of
supplies, as basic services have
yet to be
restored. The fire destroyed
2,400 buildings,
about 10 percent of the city and
forced 80,000
people to flee.
A French company says its search
vessel has
picked up black box signals from
an EgyptAir
plane that crashed last month.
They came from
deep in the Mediterranean Sea,
near the plane's
last known location, north of
Alexandria,
Egypt. The flight disappeared on
May 19, with
66 people on board. Search teams
have found
debris, but the cause of the
crash remains
unclear.
The U.N. Children's Fund warned
today that
20,000 Iraqi children are caught
in the fighting
at Fallujah. They're among some
50,000 civilians
trapped there. The warning came
as government
forces ran into fierce
resistance from Islamic
State militants.
Prime Minister Haider al-Abadi
visited the
front line and said the military
is trying
to safeguard Fallujah's people.
HAIDER AL-ABADI, Iraqi Prime
Minister (through
translator): The enemy has been
denied most
of the chances to flee. But many
civilians
are still there. The main target
of the operation
now is to reduce the number of
victims among
civilians and also to decrease
losses among
our armed forces. We may raise
the Iraqi flag
inside Fallujah in the coming
few days.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Despite that
prediction,
it's widely expected that the
fight for Fallujah
could go on for some time.
In Somalia, Islamist Al-Shabaab
militants
stormed a hotel in Mogadishu,
killing at least
six people and taking a number
of hostages.
The dead included two members of
Parliament.
The attack began when a suicide
bomber blew
up his vehicle in front of the
hotel's entrance,
leaving burning wreckage.
Several gunmen then
stormed in. It's the latest in a
series of
such attacks.
Back in this country, federal
officials announced
they won't charge two
Minneapolis policemen
with civil rights violations for
killing a
black man last November;
24-year-old Jamar
Clark was shot during a struggle
with the
white officers. It sparked weeks
of protests,
with demonstrators claiming
Clark was handcuffed
when he was shot. But the U.S.
attorney says
the evidence suggests he wasn't.
ANDREW LUGER, U.S. Attorney,
District of Minnesota:
Given the lack of bruising, the
lack of Mr.
Clark's DNA on the handcuffs and
the deeply
conflicted testimony about
whether he was
handcuffed, we determined that
we could not
pursue this case based on a
prosecution theory
that Mr. Clark was handcuffed at
the time
that he was shot.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Earlier this
year, a state
prosecutor also declined to file
charges in
Clark's death.
Meanwhile, in Oklahoma, a former
volunteer
sheriff's deputy faces four
years in prison
for fatally shooting an unarmed
suspect last
year. Robert Bates is 74. He was
sentenced
Tuesday in Tulsa for
second-degree manslaughter.
Bates killed Eric Harris during
a sting involving
illegal gun sales. He has said
he meant to
use a stun gun, but grabbed his
handgun by
mistake.
Wall Street struggled today to
eke out small
gains. The Dow Jones industrial
average was
up just two points to close at
17789. The
Nasdaq rose four points, and the
S&P 500 added
two.
And an excavation in London has
unearthed
the oldest handwritten document
ever found
in Britain. The Roman tablet
dates from 57
A.D., just 14 years after the
city was founded.
It turned up during construction
of a new
headquarters for media giant
Bloomberg. In
all, more than 400 wooden
tablets were found,
including one with the earliest
written reference
to London. The records refer to
everything
from beer deliveries to legal
rulings.
Still to come on the "NewsHour":
Gwen Ifill
sits down with the president,
and we get the
analysis of Mark Shields and
David Brooks;
a NASA mission to create an
inflatable space
pod; why nearly half of
Americans don't have
$400 for an emergency; and much
more.
pod; why nearly half of
Americans don't have
$400 for an emergency; and much
more.
Now back to Gwen in Elkhart,
Indiana.
Here's more from her
wide-ranging interview
with the president.
GWEN IFILL: Many people,
including probably
some folks in this room...
BARACK OBAMA, President of the
United States:
Yes.
GWEN IFILL: ... think the
deficits have gone
up and the jobless rate has gone
up, and,
in fact, that their lives have
not improved.
How -- in fact, we have the
nominee for -- the
presumptive nominee for the
Republican Party
saying, Donald Trump, saying
America is a
Third World nation. How do you
persuade or,
I suppose, how does your likely
Democratic
successor, possible, persuade
anybody that's
not true?
BARACK OBAMA: Well, it's
important you said
my successor, because Michelle
would be very
upset if she thought I was
running again.
(LAUGHTER)
BARACK OBAMA: Look, you just
look at the evidence
here in Elkhart, as you
mentioned in the introduction.
When I took office, this was the
first city
I came to.
And unemployment about a month
after I took
office, a month-and-a-half after
I took office,
was almost 20 percent. One out
of 10 people
were behind on their mortgage or
in foreclosure.
Today, the unemployment rate is
around 4 percent.
It's only about one in 30 people
who are behind
on their mortgage.
Now, the R.V. industry, which is
central to
Elkhart, is on track to break
records in terms
of sales. And so that doesn't
mean that folks
aren't struggling in some
circumstances. And
one of the things that I have
emphasized is
that there are some long-term
trends in the
economy that we have to tackle,
in terms of
wages not going up as fast as
they used to,
some big costs, like college
costs or health
care costs, that are still a
challenge, people
still worrying about retirement.
And so we're going to have to
make sure that
we make some good decisions
going forward.
But the notion that somehow
America is in
decline is just not borne out by
the facts.
GWEN IFILL: But it resonates. It
resonates.
There are a lot of aggrieved
people who are
voting in big numbers for Donald
Trump.
BARACK OBAMA: Well, look, the --
I think that
what has always been true in
American politics
is that, when we have gone
through a tough
time -- and we went through the
worst financial
crisis of our lifetimes. I'm
looking around.
And I think it's safe to say
that it's been
the worst in the lifetimes or
memories of
most people here. Then you feel
nervous.
People lost homes. People lost
savings. People
were worried about whether or
not they could
make ends meet. And so worse --
even though
we have recovered, people feel
like the ground
under their feet isn't quite as
solid.
And in those circumstances, a
lot of times,
it's easy for somebody to come
up and say,
you know what, if we deport all
the immigrants
and build a wall, or if we cut
off trade with
China, or if we do X or Y or Z,
that there's
some simple answer and,
suddenly, everything's
going to feel secure. And...
GWEN IFILL: Why don't you
mention Donald Trump
by name?
BARACK OBAMA: You know, he seems
to do a good
job mentioning his own name.
(LAUGHTER)
BARACK OBAMA: So, I figure, you
know, I will
let him do his advertising for
him.
GWEN IFILL: Do you consider at
all that any
of the support for him is
backlash against
you personally?
BARACK OBAMA: Well, here is one
thing I would
say.
And I just spoke about this at
the local high
school. I think Trump is a more
colorful character
than some of the other
Republican elected
officials.
But a lot of the story that he's
telling is
entirely consistent with what
folks have been
saying about me or the general
story they
have been telling about the
economy for the
last seven-and-a-half, the last
10, the last
20, the last 30 years.
HARI SREENIVASAN: And we pick it
up from there
with "NewsHour" regulars,
syndicated columnist
Mark Shields and New York Times
columnist
David Brooks.
It is not Friday, but we are
happy to have
you here.
Of those comments, what stood
out to you?
MARK SHIELDS: What struck me was
the president
was making the case for his
eight years in
office, that the change had been
improvement.
And implicit is a recognition
that Donald
Trump's candidacy is not simply
a rejection
of President Obama's two terms.
It would be
a repudiation of him. And even
though, with
Gwen's baiting, he wouldn't say
his name or
was very reluctant to say Donald
Trump a name,
I think the president recognizes
that.
And I think was sort of -- he is
champing
at the bit to get in the
campaign.
DAVID BROOKS: First on the
repudiation point,
his -- David Axelrod, his former
strategist,
made this point months and
months ago, that
each election, people tend to
have a psychological
shift to the opposite
personality type.
So we went from the gut George
W. Bush, to
from the head Barack Obama, and
now from Obama,
we're going to from the wherever
Donald Trump.
(LAUGHTER)
DAVID BROOKS: And so they are
radically different
personality types. And I do
think there is
something for Axelrod's point,
that people
always look for something
different.
On the economic point, I think
he's right
and wrong. He's right about the
gross numbers,
that the unemployment rate is
coming down,
job creation has been pretty
good. But it
is a two-tier thing. If you look
at manufacturing,
especially over the last 19
months, it's just
been hit. It's been hit by weak
demand from
abroad, so many countries in
recession.
It has been hit by high dollar.
And so those
sort of industrial places in
places like Elkhart,
Michigan, Upstate New York,
Central Pennsylvania,
those manufacturing sectors have
been worse
off now than they were even a
couple of years
ago because of sort of weak
manufacturing.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Mark, what
about this idea
there is a disconnect? Gwen
brings it up.
But also we had it on our Web
site with different
conversations that we had from
the people
that were in this town hall,
that the president
can lay out his case, and here
are all the
economic numbers, here are the
facts, here
is what your unemployment was,
here is what
it is now, but then you have
somebody that
stands up and says, you know
what, I used
to work at a manufacturing
plant. And my job
is gone. What are you going to
do about it?
MARK SHIELDS: No, that's right.
Carrier air
conditioning, which Donald Trump
played to
a fare-thee-well, quite
honestly, and understandably,
that they are leaving
Indianapolis and going
to Mexico and taking the jobs
with it.
I thought he made a better case.
And it's
a sense of trying to remind
people, but it
comes down to, how do you feel?
I mean, President
Obama has a surprisingly good
job rating.
David mentioned George W. Bush.
George W.
Bush in the fall of 2008, when
John McCain
was trying to win the Republican
-- another
term for the Republican White
House, had a
25 percent favorable rating.
The president is over 50. I
mean, he's got
a higher job rating. But people
don't feel
good about the direction of the
country. And
I think that's real. And that's
partly Washington.
It's partly Wall Street. Things
aren't working,
that nobody really cares that
the top 1 percent
-- I think there is a whole host
of factors
that contribute to that.
But the president is -- he is
cerebral. He
makes a cerebral argument. But,
at a gut level,
it probably isn't as persuasive.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Is this -- is
this -- sorry,
you wanted...
DAVID BROOKS: Yes, I would just
say, it's
so regional.
If you go to the Industrial
Midwest, yes,
it feels like that. It feels
bad. You go to
the Bay Area, they're just
adding jobs at
a great rate. You go to
Nashville. Orlando
is back. Phoenix is back.
Houston is exploding.
And so the Sunbelt is back. And
the Sunbelt
was so badly hit in 2008, but
it's back.
The Industrial Midwest is almost
in another
little downward hiccup.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Events like
this, I mean,
this -- there was a specific
reason he chose
Elkhart. This was the first
place that he
visited after his presidency
began. He wants
to -- this is a kind of
legacy-solidifying
look at how much this place has
improved since
I have been in office, right?
But it almost feels like, as
Mark said, almost
a campaign-style event to
solidify the legacy.
Just reminder, I was pretty good
for the country.
DAVID BROOKS: Yes. It is not the
right moment
for that, probably.
This is a moment when pessimism
is just en
vogue. And he's got numbers.
He's got numbers
on his side overall, as I say,
but the country
is not in a mood to think it's
heading in
the right track. There is almost
a near consensus
that we are not.
MARK SHIELDS: Those numbers are
pretty impressive.
It was at 19.6 percent
unemployment in Elkhart
when he first went there, down
to 4 percent.
It is, once again, as it claimed
to be, the
R.V., the recreation vehicle,
capital of the
world.
But the mortgage and people who
are behind
in their mortgage payment or
facing foreclosure,
it was one out of 10 in 2009.
Now it's one
out of 30. I mean, those are all
improvements.
Those are all -- and you could
say, well,
it would have happened anyway,
it happened
in spite of.
But he took some real actions
that were controversial
that cost him politically to do
it. And, you
know, I think he's entitled to
take some credit
for the improvement.
HARI SREENIVASAN: You know,
there were e-mails
going around today saying, you
know what,
the people of Elkhart succeeded
in spite of
the president.
MARK SHIELDS: Yes. I think that
was governor,
Governor Mike Pence, I think.
The Republican
governor is up for reelection
this year.
The test to me whether the
president is in
good shape or bad shape is that
Joe Donnelly,
the Democratic senator, was
there at the event.
He's up for reelection next
year, not this
year. But, I mean, if you really
think that
somebody is Typhoid Mary
politically, you
can think of creative reasons
not to be there.
There are other subcommittee
assignments that
you -- are going to keep you
busy. But the
fact that he was there with the
president
probably indicated to me that he
felt that
the president would be a help,
rather than
a hindrance to his own career.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Despite the
fact that the
president wouldn't prefer to
name Donald Trump
out loud -- it is almost like he
is treating
him like a Harry Potter
character of Voldemort
or something.
(LAUGHTER)
HARI SREENIVASAN: Donald Trump
is still right
in the news. And here we have a
possibility
where possibly two of the -- the
Republican
and the Democratic National
Committee kind
of nominees could have kind of
legal clouds
hanging over them or at least an
investigation
hanging over them as they become
the nominees
and representatives of the party
for the presidency.
DAVID BROOKS: Yes, well, the
Trump thing in
the news today, my newspaper had
a good story
on the Trump University.
And we sort of had the outlines
of the story,
but I think what was fresh in
some of the
new documents that we now have
access to is
the way that professors at Trump
University
were really pressuring people to
get out their
credit cards, to get multiple
credit cards,
to max out their credit cards,
just to give
all this money to Trump
University, and then
they left these people high and
dry and deeply
in debt, offering them very
little in return.
So it was the machinations of
scamming these
people that we learned today.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Fair that
Hillary Clinton
says this means that my
competitor, my opponent
is a fraud?
MARK SHIELDS: Well, if you
listen to the plaintiffs.
I mean, Donald Trump did a
classic Donald
Trump defense, which is to
attack the judge,
not -- who didn't bring the
case, who's hearing
the case. The judge isn't the
plaintiff. The
judge isn't saying he was
scammed or bilked.
The judge happens -- Judge
Gonzalo Curiel
happens to be of Latin descent.
Donald Trump accused him of
having a vendetta
because of that. He is a native
of Indiana.
And he -- you know, this is
classic, classic
Trump.
But David's former employer, The
Wall Street
Journal editorial page, today
took him on
as the politics of personal
grievance, that
he has an ability to personalize
things, in
addition to this legal case
today. I think
it is quite unparalleled in
presidential nominees.
HARI SREENIVASAN: All right,
Mark Shields,
David Brooks, thanks so much.
The first inflatable room in
space was attached
to the International Space
Station by NASA
on Saturday. It's the beginning
of a two-year
test period for this expandable
habitat.
Correspondent Miles O'Brien
reports on this
new frontier in space travel as
part of our
weekly series about the Leading
Edge of science.
MILES O'BRIEN: NASA just added
some space
to the space station, and it is
16 cubic meters
like no other. Inflated
carefully with short
spurts of air, it is an
expandable module,
the first designed for human
habitation ever
to reach low-Earth orbit.
It's a big step on the long road
to building
spacecraft and habitats for
human missions
to Mars. Expandables allow
engineers to color
outside the lines, beyond the
diameter of
to Mars. Expandables allow
engineers to color
outside the lines, beyond the
diameter of
the nose cone of the rocket
called the fairing.
That's the constraint when
launching a module
made of rigid aluminum. It's
sort of like
carrying a tent to space.
Jason Crusan is NASA's director
for advanced
exploration systems.
JASON CRUSAN, NASA Director for
Advanced Exploration
Systems: Expandables allow you
to pack up
whatever your habitat is and fit
in more potential
volume in the same fairing
volume. So that's
the key advantage, is the volume
advantage.
MILES O'BRIEN: It's called BEAM,
an acronym
for Bigelow Expandable Activity
Module. It's
a technology demonstrator, an
experiment to
see how well it performs in
space.
The man behind BEAM, Robert
Bigelow, watched
it all unfold in the viewing
room overlooking
the space station flight control
room in Houston.
His company, Bigelow Aerospace,
is based in
North Las Vegas.
All right, so what are we
looking at here?
Bigelow made his fortune in real
estate, contracting
and extended stay hotels. He is
now pursuing
a lifelong passion for space. He
believes
expandables are a game-changer.
ROBERT BIGELOW, Bigelow
Aerospace: It's that
dramatic. It's that huge in
terms of concept
change. We didn't invent the
change. This
is a NASA idea.
MILES O'BRIEN: It is an idea as
old as the
space age itself. In a seminal
series on space
exploration in "Collier's"
magazine in 1954,
legendary rocket scientist
Wernher von Braun
envisioned humans flying to, and
living on,
Mars in inflatables.
The first communications
satellites, Echo
1 and Echo 2, launched in 1960
and '64 respectively,
were inflatable metallic
balloons, passive
reflectors of microwave
transmissions. At
about the same time, NASA
pondered several
early space station designs with
expandable
modules. And in the 1990s, when
the International
Space Station was becoming a
reality, the
agency designed an expandable
called TransHab
that would have replaced the
U.S. crew quarters.
Expanded, it would have twice
the diameter,
and three times the volume, of
the rigid aluminum
structure currently in use. But
amid cost
overruns, Congress canceled
TransHab. And
Bigelow Aerospace obtained the
patents from
NASA.
ROBERT BIGELOW: When I saw that
architecture
and that whole idea, I was
enchanted by that
concept, and I thought, that's
something that
really looks cool and seems to
have a lot
of value.
MILES O'BRIEN: In 2006 and 2007,
Bigelow successfully
deployed two expandable
structures slightly
smaller than BEAM in low-Earth
orbit. Both
are still in space, and still
filled with
air.
ROBERT BIGELOW: There are a lot
of fans of
this kind of architecture. So, I
think they're
applicable anywhere in low-Earth
orbit and
on the surface of another body,
whether it's
the moon or perhaps even Mars,
and certainly
for any kind of deep space
mission.
You want to have a lot of room
for people.
People need to have a lot of
space. They don't
want to be cramped up for long
periods of
time.
MILES O'BRIEN: Bigelow took me
on a tour of
his huge, pristine facility
filled with full-sized
mockups of his expansive vision
for space.
Welcome to Olympus?
ROBERT BIGELOW: Yes. Yes.
MILES O'BRIEN: A lot of volume
here.
ROBERT BIGELOW: Yes, this could
be anything
that you could imagine.
MILES O'BRIEN: Olympus would
have twice the
volume of the entire
International Space Station,
and yet could be delivered to
orbit in one
launch, albeit on a super heavy
rocket still
on the drawing boards at NASA or
SpaceX.
Still, Bigelow has some big
ideas for this
very big space.
ROBERT BIGELOW: So is it an
entertainment
center? Is it a
command-and-control center?
Is it a hospital? Are you
growing food? Is
it a hydroponic center? Is it a
dormitory?
Are you making -- is it a
manufacturing facility,
you're making all kinds of
things, or is it
an assembly facility, where you
are assembling
satellites and launching them
out the airlock?
MILES O'BRIEN: But before
Olympus becomes
a reality, Bigelow would like to
attach a
module like this one to the
International
Space Station. He'd also like to
build his
own space station, which could
orbit the Earth,
moon or Mars.
He envisions his expandables as
orbiting time-shares
that can be used for
manufacturing and science
and as a destination for
emerging nations
hoping to fly their own
astronauts. Oh, and
don't forget tourism. He is,
after all, a
hotel guy.
ROBERT BIGELOW: So, if somebody
wants to use
it for a hotel purpose, that's
fine. We will
lease that to them, and then
they can sublet
and sub-rent that out to
whomever.
MILES O'BRIEN: BEAM and all the
rest of Bigelow's
expandables are made of several
layers of
Vectran, a material stronger
than Kevlar,
which is used in bulletproof
vests. Over the
next six months, astronauts will
only venture
into BEAM periodically to glean
data on the
air quality, temperature,
condensation, radiation
and possible micro-meteoroid and
orbital debris
impacts.
JASON CRUSAN: But, to be honest,
actually,
just the whole process of
developing and expansion
are even more critical to using
this in the
first place.
MILES O'BRIEN: BEAM will remain
on the International
Space Station for two years.
Bigelow is seeking
permission from NASA to sell
access to the
craft to commercial, educational
and scientific
customers.
ROBERT BIGELOW: Some people may
think, well,
that's not any big deal. Well,
it is. It is
the start of something.
McDonald's started with one
burger somewhere,
right, someplace. OK? So, it all
has to have
a beginning. And this is what
BEAM is for
us, is it's a beginning, even if
it's on a
very small scale.
MILES O'BRIEN: Bigelow clearly
believes the
work in low-Earth orbit is just
the beginning
of creating a viable industry in
space, which,
in turn, could help NASA's goal
to land and
sustain humans on Mars. The
universe is ever
expanding, and so will the
spacecraft designed
to explore it.
Miles O'Brien, the "PBS
NewsHour," North Las
Vegas, Nevada.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Stay with us.
Coming up on the "NewsHour":
rebuilding Nepal's
historic temples destroyed by a
catastrophic
earthquake; and how parents can
prepare for
the worst without scaring their
children.
HARI SREENIVASAN: But first:
financial fragility.
Most American households did
slightly better
economically in 2015 than 2014,
according
to a recent survey by the
Federal Reserve;
69 percent said they were living
comfortably
or doing OK, up from 65 percent.
But 31 percent
said they were either struggling
to get by
or just getting by, a figure
that includes
millions of middle-class
Americans.
In fact, it can be surprising to
learn just
which Americans continue to
struggle.
Judy Woodruff has the latest in
our series
with "The Atlantic."
JUDY WOODRUFF: By almost any
measure, Neal
Gabler has led a successful
life. He's published
respected biographies of Walt
Disney, Barbra
Streisand, and Walter Winchell,
written for
leading newspapers and
magazines, taught at
prestigious universities.
He's a husband and the father of
two daughters,
now launched in their own
successful careers.
He lives in New York's Long
Island enclave
the Hamptons, a place of natural
beauty and
mecca for wealth and celebrity.
And yet, for
years, Neal Gabler harbored a
mortifying secret.
NEAL GABLER, Author/Journalist:
It's very
difficult. I will tell you who
it's really
been difficult on is my wife.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Being the writer
that he his,
Gabler decided to come to terms
with his secret
by writing about it.
NEAL GABLER: I never write about
myself. So
I didn't embark on this project
saying, oh,
gosh, I can't wait to write
about my own failures,
which is basically what the
article is about.
But, really, the spring of this
piece was
reading a news item about the
Federal Reserve
household economic survey, in
which they asked
the question, if you had a $400
emergency,
could you meet that emergency?
And 47 percent
of the respondents said that
they couldn't
meet that emergency without
either having
to borrow money or to sell
something.
And I read that item and I said
to myself,
well, who knew? But, of course,
I knew, because
many, many times in my life, and
not just
in the distant past, but in the
unfortunate
present, I couldn't afford those
$400.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And that's the
hard truth.
Despite all his outward signs of
success,
Neal Gabler is frequently broke.
His recent
story in "The Atlantic" magazine
brought widespread
attention to that fact.
Did you hesitate at all about
baring your
personal life?
NEAL GABLER: Very much so. I'm
not the kind
of person who really likes to
expose himself.
But then that reluctance became
part of the
article itself, because I coined
the term
in the article financial
impotence.
And it struck me that talking
about our financial
situation is very much like men
not wanting
to talk about sexual impotence.
It's just
not something you do. It's an
embarrassment.
It's a shame. It's a
humiliation. And financial
problems are exactly the same
thing.
So, I thought perhaps I can help
those people
who feel shamed and embarrassed
and humiliated
and show them, look it, I'm
willing to do
this. I'm willing to expose all
of my faults,
all of my mistakes, all of my
failures. You're
not alone.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Gabler knew he
wasn't alone
even before writing the article,
due to weekly
chats with Brian Brunjes (ph),
an East Hampton
butcher.
NEAL GABLER: Brian the butcher
is my friend.
He's a wonderful, easy guy to
talk to.
And gradually, over time, we
would start getting
our financial situation, very,
very rare,
particularly among men. And I
remember one
day especially, this was one of
those periods
where I didn't have the $400 --
and, unfortunately,
they come all too frequently.
And he said, I'm going to tell
you something.
He said, I am in the same
situation. I have
got this expense and that
expense. If anybody
tells you that they're sailing
through, they're
lying.
BRIAN BRUNJES, Butcher:
Everybody struggles.
I have a child with autism. He
was diagnosed
20 years ago. My wife had to
stop working.
Became a one-income family. We
accumulated
a lot of outside expenses. So, I
struggled.
But you know what, I got to do
what I got
to do.
NEAL GABLER: And that was almost
the final
push to write the piece,
because, you know,
he's right. There are so many
people in trouble.
They won't talk about it. Brian
is one of
the very few who would be open
with me, and
I was able to be open with him
as a result.
So we were able to share this.
BRIAN BRUNJES: It kind of like
took a weight
off my shoulder knowing that a
guy like Neal,
he's got a house in East
Hampton, you figure,
ah, you know, he's doing all
right for himself.
But he's not. Everybody's
struggling. And
it's tough.
EDWARD WOLFF, New York
University: The middle
class is in desperate straits.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Edward Wolff is a
professor
of economics at New York
University.
EDWARD WOLFF: Today, the average
family has
enough financial reserves to
keep going for
about three weeks. That's it.
And that's middle-income.
And if you go further down the
ladder, basically,
the financial reserves keep the
family going
for a couple days at most. And
so these financial
reserves are just completely
evaporated. It's
incredible.
ANNAMARIA LUSARDI, George
Washington University:
We came up with this word,
financial fragility,
when we thought of looking at
the capacity
of families to bear a shock, to
face a shock.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Annamaria Lusardi
is an economist
at George Washington University.
ANNAMARIA LUSARDI: And the way
we formulated
the question is, how confident
are you that
you could come up with $2,000 if
an unexpected
need arose within the next
month? And what
we found is 40 percent of
families could not
come up with $2,000 in 30 days.
So it's important
to recognize that, that the
financial fragility
is just so widespread.
EDWARD WOLFF: The main reason is
that we have
had a long period of wage
stagnation in this
country, even -- going further
back, even
to the mid-1970s.
So, in the face of stagnating
incomes, what
did families do? Well, for a
while they did
accumulate wealth, and this was
buoyed by
the housing price boom of going
forward until
2006, and then suddenly the
housing market
collapsed, and so did net worth.
JUDY WOODRUFF: How much of what
you would
describe as your financial
condition is due
to decisions that Neal Gabler
made, and how
much of it is due to outside
circumstances
beyond your control?
NEAL GABLER: That's a great
question, and
I want to take responsibility.
I don't want to put everything
off on these
larger financial forces. I chose
to become
a writer. This is the most
financially perilous
profession that one can possibly
imagine,
except possibly being an actor.
I chose to live in New York City
because I
thought I needed to be close to
magazines
and publishers that I needed for
my writing
career. So I did that. And New
York is expensive.
I chose to have two children.
Children are
expensive.
I made the choice to send them
to expensive
colleges, so those were all
choices that I
made that had serious financial
consequences,
but, again, those choices were
what I call
life.
JUDY WOODRUFF: So many young
people today
are told, find your passion and
follow it.
It sounds like that's what you
did.
NEAL GABLER: That's exactly what
I did. I
followed my bliss, and I'm happy
I did. So,
I accept responsibility. On the
other hand,
since roughly half of Americans
are suffering
the same sort of financial
fragility I'm in,
we can't say that they're all
imbeciles.
What we have to say is that
there are forces
beyond our control.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Let me ask you a
couple of
other questions about personal
decisions you
made. You brought it up
yourself, the decision
to live here. We're in East
Hampton. People
think, living in the Hamptons?
That's a really
expensive part of America.
NEAL GABLER: You know, when
people hear that
I live in the Hamptons, the
first thing they
say to me is, oh, my gosh, you
live in the
Hamptons.
What they don't really
understand is that
there are two Hamptons. There
are the people
who live here full time, as I
do, who are
not wealthy, and there are the
people who
come here during the summer who
are.
So, yes, I do live in the
Hamptons. And when
I bought this house, I could
afford it. It
wasn't exorbitantly expensive. I
was able
to afford it for a very long
time.
This is all cedar, but you can
see how many
shingles are missing here.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Right. Right.
Right.
These days, though, the house
has fallen into
disrepair. It's in desperate
need of a new
roof. Floorboards are rotting.
It has not
seen fresh paint in many years.
NEAL GABLER: If I had $100,000,
I could probably...
JUDY WOODRUFF: You could get all
this done.
NEAL GABLER: I could probably
get it done.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Yes. Yes.
Did you ever think about moving
to a less
expensive part of the country?
NEAL GABLER: We did. And we have
talked about
that. But here's the catch-22 of
that. If
we were -- once the recession
hit, the house
lost its value, as it did for
most Americans.
So, now the house is
deteriorating, it's lost
its value. So if I had the
resources to fix
up the house to sell it, I
wouldn't need to
sell it. That's the catch-22. I
am a financial
illiterate, and financial
illiterates pay
a heavy price for their
financial illiteracy.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Gabler is not
using the term
financial illiteracy loosely.
It's a phenomenon
economists say is a key factor
in the current
fragility of the middle class.
ANNAMARIA LUSARDI: We measure
financial literacy
by looking at basic financial
knowledge. We
are experiencing much more
complex financial
markets, much more complex
financial products
than in the past. And the
knowledge of people
has not kept up.
NEAL GABLER: Half of America
will have to
compromise on their dreams.
There's one statistic that I
cite in the piece
from a USA Today survey which I
think is fascinating.
And that survey determined that
a middle-class
existence in America would cost
$130,000.
JUDY WOODRUFF: A year.
NEAL GABLER: A year.
The median income in America is
somewhere
around $50,000. So a
middle-class existence
was more than two times as great
as the median
income. And what that tells you
is that the
face of financial fragility is
the face of
the college-educated, as well as
those without
a high school diploma.
It's the face of white America,
as well as
the face of minority Americans,
who obviously
suffer much greater. This is an
equal opportunity
situation. It affects so many of
us. It's
a great sadness to think that
people feel
compelled to give up their
dreams of what
they thought a modest
middle-class life would
be. But they have. They have.
Even I have.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Now: restoring
ancient cultural
treasures in earthquake-ravaged
Nepal.
A little more than one year ago,
a magnitude-7.8
tremor took 8,000 lives and
displaced hundreds
of thousands. It also destroyed
historic temples
and religious monuments that are
classified
as World Heritage Sites.
As part of our Culture at Risk
series, special
correspondent Fred de Sam Lazaro
reports from
Kathmandu.
FRED DE SAM LAZARO: Until now,
the major concern
in Nepal has been the
humanitarian response
and the slow pace of rebuilding,
as hundreds
of thousands of quake survivors
remain in
flimsy, temporary shelters.
But, for historians,
archaeologists and even
tourism promoters, the
earthquake did extensive
damage to Nepal's historic
temples, structures
anywhere from 200 to 1,400 years
old.
CHRISTIAN MANHART, UNESCO: The
temples of
Nepal are absolutely unique.
They have -- they
are inscribed on the World
Heritage list.
So, you will find such a dense
concentration
of cultural heritage in almost
no country
of the world. Also, it is an
exceptional mix
of religions. Many temples are
Hindu and Buddhist
at the same time.
FRED DE SAM LAZARO: Hinduism has
deep -- and
intersecting -- roots here with
Buddhism,
whose founder, Gautama Buddha,
was born in
what today is Nepal some 2,600
years ago.
The rich cultural heritage is
also a living
one, says Christian Manhart of
the United
Nations cultural organization
UNESCO.
CHRISTIAN MANHART: So it is not
just beautiful
monuments which are there for
tourists, but
they are used.
FRED DE SAM LAZARO: And that
adds more complication
to the rebuilding efforts,
already slowed
by bureaucracy and political
instability,
setting up a cultural a clash
ROHIT RANJITKAR, Kathmandu
Valley Preservation
Trust: We don't have this
romanticism with
historical patina. So this is,
you know, a
different way of looking at the
monument,
as a Westerner eye and as the
local people
here.
FRED DE SAM LAZARO: Rohit
Ranjitkar is with
a nonprofit organization called
the Kathmandu
Valley Preservation Trust. He
says, for most
Nepalis, these historic sites
are first and
foremost places of active
worship.
ROHIT RANJITKAR: Basically, they
have the
attachment with the God and the
place with
the religious activities, not
with the architecture.
You know, for them, the temple
will be rebuilt
or not rebuilt. It does not make
any difference.
FRED DE SAM LAZARO: Ranjitkar's
group has
been restoring temples here for
more than
two decades, with funding mostly
from private
Western donors. He says the
trust's work likely
helped some structures withstand
the quake.
Much of this complex in the
Patan neighborhood
of the capital survived, and
it's become a
shelter for antiquities salvaged
from destroyed
temples.
ROHIT RANJITKAR: So, these all
rescued from
the rubble.
FRED DE SAM LAZARO: They are
among thousands
of icons, statues, and timbers
now housed
in makeshift storage until they
can be restored
to their original homes.
ROHIT RANJITKAR: This is one the
oldest sections
of the whole palace from 1627.
FRED DE SAM LAZARO: The temples
and monuments
are often part of royal palace
complexes.
It's here that the delicate
balancing act
between Western or international
norms and
local concerns comes into play.
So this is about 300 years old,
and this is...
ROHIT RANJITKAR: Last year.
FRED DE SAM LAZARO: Last year.
Here, Ranjitkar explained they
decided to
repair weathered 300-year-old
architectural
elements with brand-new work,
going against
the grain of many art historians
who would
have left the old damaged
structure as it
was.
ROHIT RANJITKAR: The people who
can still
do that, we need to promote
them. If we don't
do this, then this skill will
also be lost.
FRED DE SAM LAZARO: He says one
priority is
to preserve the skills and
artisanship handed
down the generations over
centuries, but disappearing
in a modern world economy.
Three days?
ROHIT RANJITKAR: Three days to
make this.
FRED DE SAM LAZARO: Wow.
The craftsmen mainly come from
lower socioeconomic
classes. Many have gone into
other work, notably
as laborers in the oil-rich Gulf
States.
There's also a shortage of
recorded information
to guide a rebuilding that's
faithful to the
original temple design. Shukra
Sagar Shrestha,
a retired archaeologist, spends
much of his
time gathering old photographs,
documents,
and drawings to help the
artisans.
And he studies the ancient
inscriptions and
intricate carvings on these
temple icons.
This series, for example, is a
kind of dos
and don'ts, he says, the path to
heaven or
hell in one's next life.
SHUKRA SAGAR SHRESTHA,
Archaeologist: Because
you gave your daughter to marry,
but you accepted
money.
FRED DE SAM LAZARO: So he has
been put into
a cauldron of boiling water
because he accepted
a dowry for his daughter?
SHUKRA SAGAR SHRESTHA: Exactly.
FRED DE SAM LAZARO: Nepal's
government says
work will begin in the next few
months on
rebuilding major sites that were
destroyed
with a target to finish in five
to seven years.
UNESCO's Manhart is not sure.
CHRISTIAN MANHART: We were quite
optimistic.
Directly after the earthquake,
there was so
much solidarity from the
international community.
We thought, in six years, we
would be able
to do it. But now we are tapping
for 10 years
to reconstruct most of this
heritage, if,
of course, the funding is
available.
FRED DE SAM LAZARO: All told,
about $205 million
will need to be raised, he says,
and there's
more than enough to start.
For his part, Ranjitkar says
here he leans
toward a more Western or
international preference,
repairing a lot of the woodwork,
instead of
replacing it.
ROHIT RANJITKAR: The local
people, they don't
like it. In our religion we
don't worship
image which is broken or which
is chipped
out. So, when you have some
damage in the
image, so people normally
replace it with
a new one. They don't use the
old one.
FRED DE SAM LAZARO: As the
rebuilding gets
into full swing, Ranjitkar plans
to spend
time with worshipers, trying to
convince them
of the virtue of the ancient
artisanship,
especially to another set of
pilgrims to these
temples, tourists.
Their reverence is mainly for
the historic
architectural patina and their
dollars a critical
engine in the local economy.
For the "PBS NewsHour," this is
Fred de Sam
Lazaro in Kathmandu.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Fred's
reporting is a partnership
with the Under-Told Stories
Project at the
University of St. Thomas in
Minnesota.
A version of this story aired on
the PBS program
"Religion & Ethics Newsweekly."
Yesterday, the U.S. State
Department warned
travelers of the potential for
terror attacks
Yesterday, the U.S. State
Department warned
travelers of the potential for
terror attacks
in Europe this summer. But for
many Americans,
the fear of terrorism is not
limited to threats
abroad.
National security expert
Juliette Kayyem has
this essay on how parents and
children can
feel safer at home in the face
of growing
anxieties.
JULIETTE KAYYEM, Former
Department of Homeland
Security Assistant Secretary:
"What am I supposed
to say?" a close friend asks me.
Her daughter had just approached
her with
this question: "Mom, is ISIS in
New York City?"
My friend is looking for a
confidante, but
also for any confidence I can
deliver from
my professional vantage point,
as a homeland
security expert. It also doesn't
hurt that
I'm a mother of three. My friend
wants me
to tell her everything is going
to be OK.
And I get it. I get that
irrational fear in
the back of our minds, that what
if, that,
yes, I know the chances of some
random act
of violence or terror is
unlikely, but, still,
I get it. Even a .0001 percent
statistical
likelihood still means someone
falls within
it, and what if that's my child?
So, here's the truth, brutal and
liberating:
There is no such thing as
perfect security,
no white flag that will be
raised, no future
world filled with unicorns and
rainbows. No
homeland defense apparatus is
going to make
perfect security attainable.
Government certainly has the
responsibility
to protect us, but in this day
and age of
globalism, where we enjoy the
flow of people
and goods and ideas, we will
never get the
risk to anywhere near zero.
Simply put, stuff
happens. Now embrace it and move
on to what
you can control.
As a responsible parent, you
purchase that
car seat. You buy a bike helmet,
talk to your
kids about texting and driving.
You minimize
their risks and maximize their
defenses. And
yet, somehow, terror seems
different, so random,
uncontrollable.
That distinction is of our own
making. If
something catastrophic were to
happen, there
is comfort in knowing that basic
precautions
can go far to give you grip and
control in
the aftermath.
The general rule of thumb is
that every home
should be prepared for basic
needs for three
days without outside help. In
the field, it's
called 72 on you.
So, first, go to your convenient
supermarket
and get the following: water,
cereal, nuts,
protein bars, a flashlight,
batteries, and
a first-aid kit. That's it,
seriously. There
is always more you could get to
make life
better. We have added vodka and
Diet Coke
and Red Vines to our stash,
given my family's
bad habits.
But don't let the perfect be
enemy of the
prepared. Then make copies of
essential papers.
Mail them out of state or save a
photo of
them to the cloud.
Finally, have a conversation at
home about
what to do if family members are
in different
places. In a crisis, all you
will care about
is family unification. Talk
through strategies
if cell service is down. Map out
alternative
plans.
Addressing these risks isn't
going to shock
your older kids. They already
saw it all on
Twitter. Manage your and their
fears by preparing
for when the bad thing might
happen.
As parents, the more we can
maximize our own
readiness, the less we will feel
that we have
no grip over the mayhem that
exists out there.
Professionally and personally, I
would like
nothing more than to be able to
answer the
question is ISIS in New York
City with an
absolute no. But, failing that,
why not have
a backup plan? Own it. Then move
on.
HARI SREENIVASAN: And, remember,
Gwen Ifill
is in Elkhart, Indiana, with a
preview of
tonight's "NewsHour" special on
PBS -- Gwen.
GWEN IFILL: Thanks, Hari.
Stay tuned to watch the full
hour of my interview
with President Obama, followed
by a town hall,
where the president takes
questions from the
people of Elkhart. That's coming
up tonight,
here on PBS -- Hari.
HARI SREENIVASAN: If you won't
be in front
of a TV later, you can also
watch the PBS
special on our Ustream or
YouTube channels,
on our Facebook page, or on our
Web site at
PBS.org/NewsHour. We will also
have a version
of the program running in
Spanish. Find more
of our in-depth coverage on
Elkhart and the
president's visit.
Also online: What's one of the
best ways to
protect the family finances? Put
mom in charge,
says author Kimberly Palmer. She
explains
why more women need to be
managing their money
and offers steps to get started.
All that
and more is on our Web site,
PBS.org/NewsHour.
And that's the "NewsHour" for
tonight.
On Thursday: the debate over
affordable housing
in the high-cost San Francisco
Bay area.
I'm Hari Sreenivasan.
Join us online and again here
tomorrow evening.
For all of us at the "PBS
NewsHour," thank
Join us online and again here
tomorrow evening.
For all of us at the "PBS
NewsHour," thank
you. Have a good night.